>> Ifill: SYRIAN REBELS ACCUSED
GOVERNMENT FORCES OF USING
POISON GAS TODAY IN A DEADLY
ATTACK NEAR THE CAPITAL,
DAMASCUS.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Suarez: AND I'M RAY SUAREZ.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT, THE
ALLEGED ATTACK COMES AS U.N.
INVESTIGATORS LOOK INTO PREVIOUS
REPORTS OF CHEMICAL-WEAPONS.
WE EXPLORE HOW THE USE OF POISON
GAS COULD BE CONFIRMED.
>> Ifill: THEN, ARMY PRIVATE
BRADLEY MANNING GETS THIRTY-FIVE
YEARS IN PRISON FO RELREASING
CLASSIFIED INFORMATION TO
WIKILEAKS.
WE WRAP UP TODAY'S DEVELOPMENTS
IN HIS COURT MARTIAL.
>> Suarez: A NEW REPORT SAYS THE
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY CAN
ACCESS A LARGE SWATH OF ALL U.S.
INTERNET TRAFFIC, INCLUDING THE
CONTENT OF EMAILS.
MARGARET WARNER DIGSNTO I THE
DETAILS.
>> Ifill: ANWE CD ONTINUE OUR
LOOK BACK AT THE MARCH ON
WASHINGTON 50 YEARS ON.
TONIGHT, REFLECTIONS FROM ONE OF
ITS ORGANIZERS, CONGRESSWOMAN
ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON.
>> IT WAS STARTLING TO SEE SO
MANY PEOPLE COME.
AND I REMEMBER STANDING AT THE
LINCOLN MEMORIAL, LOOKING OUT.
LOOK, LOOKING OUT WAS WHAT WAS
THE SIGHT FOR ME, BECAUSE I
COULD NOT SEE THE LAST PERSON.
>> Ifill: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
>> Suarez: THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
POUNDED REBEL AREAS OUTSIDE THE
CAPITAL, DAMASCUS, EARLY TODAY,
AND ANTIGOVERNMENT ACTIVISTS
SAID SOME ROCKETS INCLUDED
CHEMICAL WEAPONS THAT KILLED
HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE.
.(CHILDREN SHOUTING/CRYING)
WOMEN AND CHILDREN SHIELDED
THEIR FACES WITH HANDKERCHIEFS.
WHILE VICTIMS-- WRITHING IN
PAIN-- GASPED FOR AIR,SOME
FOAMING AT THE MOUTH.
THESE AMATEUR VIDEOS-- ALL
POSTED ON SOCIAL MEDIA WEBSITES
AND CANNOT BE INDEPENDENTLY
VERIFIED-- SHOWED SCORES OF
BODIES FILLING CLINIC FLOORS AND
HALLWAYS.
ALL SHOWED LITTLE SIGNS OF
VISIBLE INJURIES.
ONE LOCAL DOCTOR'S ACCOUNT:
>> (translated): IT IS A HUGE
CRISIS, THE NUMBER OF VICTIMS IS
VERY HIGH, WE HAVE RAN OUT OF
ATROPINE AND HYDROCORTISONE.
I HAVE CARRIED IN MY OWN HANDS
AROUND 50 DEAD CHILDREN.
THE GAS WAS LOSING ITS EFFECT
AFTER HALF AN HOUR, BUT
UNFORTUNATELY PEOPLE WENT DOWN
TO THE BASEMENTS, AND BECAUSE
THE GAS IS HEAVY, IT REACHED THE
BASEMENTS, AND AS A RESULT, THE
NUMBER OF WOUNDED INCREASED.
>> Suarez: IT'S ALL EVIDENCE,
SYRIAN OPPOSITION LEADERS IN
TURKEY SAY, OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
GASSING OF ITS OWN CILIAIVNS, IN
WHAT CLD BOUE ONE OF THE
DEADLIEST INCIDENTS IN THE
TWO-YEAR-LONG SYRIAN CONFLICT.
>> THE FACES OF TERRORISTS THAT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD IS TARGETING.
THIS MASSACRE PUTS THE WORLD ON
ATTENTION, IT REALLY SENDS A
MESSAGE TO ALL INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS TO THE NUMBER OF
CRIMES THIS REGIME IS WILLING TO
COMMIT.
>> Suarez: BUT BACK IN DAMASCUS,
A MILITARY SPOKESMAN DENIED THE
ALLEGATIONS.
.>> (translated) : THE MEDIA
CHANNELS OF SEDITION AND
MISINFORMATION WHO SHED SYRIAN
BLOOD HAVE LIED AS USUAL THAT
THE SYRIAN ARAB ARMY USED
CHEMICAL WEAPONS IN THE SUBURBS
OF DAMASCUS TODAY.
THE GENERAL LEADERSHIP OF THE
ARMY CONFIRMS THESE ALLEGATIONS
ARE COMPLETELY FALSE AND ARE A
PART OF THE DIRTY MEDIA WAR THAT
IS LED BY SOME COUNTRIES THROUGH
THE MEDIA AGAINST SYRIA.
>> Suarez: THE PURPORTED ATTACK
COMES AMID REPORTS THAT ASSAD
FORCES HAVE REGAINED MAJOR
SWATHS OF TERRITORY IN THE
COUNTRY IN RECENT WEEKS AND JUST
DAYS AFTER A 20 MEMBER UNITED
NATIONS' INSPECTION TEAM
ARRIVED IN SYRIA TO INVESTIGATE
THREE OTHER POSSIBLE CHEMICAL
WEAPON INCIDENTS.
IN WASHINGTON, THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION EXPRESSED ALARM
AT NEWS OF THE ATTACK, BUT WHITE
HOUSE DEPUTY PRESS SECRETARY
JOSH EARNEST STOPPED SHORT OF
CONFIRMING DETAILS, INSTEAD
CALLING ON A U.N.-BACKED
INVESTIGAON.TI
>> THERE IS AN INVESTIGATION
TEAM ON THE GROUND IN SYRIA
RIGHT AND WE ARE HOPEFUL THAT
THE ASSAD REGIME WILL FOLLOW
THROUGH ON WHAT THEY HAVE
CLAIMED PREVIOUSLY.
AND GIVE THE INVESTIGATORS
ACCESS TO THE SITES, THE
OPPORTUNITY TO INTERVIEW
WITNESSES, THE OPPORTUNITY TO
COLLECT PHYSICAL SAMPLES, AND
OTHER THINGS THAT WOULD HELP
THEM REACH A CREDIBLE
DETERMINATION ABOUT WHAT EXACTLY
OCCURRED.
>> Suarez: WORLD LEADERS,
INCLUDING BRITAIN AND GERMANY'S
FOREIGN MINISTERS AND U.N.
SECRETARY GENERAL BAN KI MOON
EXPRESSED SHOCK AT THE CHEMICAL
WEAPONS ALLEGATIONS AND CALLED
FOR A THOROUGH INVESTIGATION.
AS DID RUSSIA , WHICH HAS
PROTECTED THE ASSAD REGIME BY
VETOING U.N. SANCTIONS AIMED AT
ENDING THE VIOLENCE.
BUT IN A STATEMENT ITS FOREIGN
MINISTRY SPOKESMAN SUGGESTED THE
INCIDENT COULD BE A PROVOCATION
BY THE OPPOSITION, SAYING:
THE U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL DID
MEET IN EMERGENCY SESSION LATE
TODAY TO DISCUSS THE DAY'S
EVENTS.
ALL THIS AS THOUSANDS  OF
SYRIANS CONTINUE TO STREAM OVER
THE BORDERS EVERYDAY OF
NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES OF IRAQ
AND JORDAN, TRYING TO ESCAPE THE
ONGOING VIOLENCE.
FOR MORE ON THE  POSSIBLE
CHEMICAL ATTACK, I'M JOINED BY
JEFFREY WHITE, A FORMER SENIOR
ANALYST AT THE DEFENSE
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, NOW AT THE
WASHINGTON INSTITUTE FOR NEAR
EAST POLICY AND AMY SMITHSON, A
SENIOR FELLOW AT THE JAMES
MARTIN CENTER FOR
NON-PROLIFERATION STUDIES.JEFFRE
TERRIBLE.
THE STATE OF THE CIVIL WAR IN
SYRIA?>> WELL, UNBELIEVABLY, IT
CONTINUES TO ESCALATE, RIGHT?
IT LOOKS LIKE THE REGIME
CONDUCTED THIS OPERATION USING A
FAIRLY SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT OF-CHT
DEMONSTRATES ONCE AGAIN THAT THE
REGIME WILL GO AS FAR AS IT NEED
TO WIN THIS WAR.
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE LOCATION, SO
CLOSE TO DAMASCUS?
>> THESE WERE AREAS, EAST GUTA
AND WESTERN GUTA IN THE DAMASCUS
SUBURBS THAT THE REBELS HAVE
HELD AND CONTROLLED FOR A LONG
TIME.
SERIES OF EXTENDED OFFENSIVES TO
GET THE REBELS OUT OF THESE
AREAS UNSUCCESSFULLY.IT'S ALSO ,
PERSONNEL, TANKS, AND SO ON IN
THESE OFFENSES.
SO IT LOOKS TO ME LIKE THE
REGIME IS TRYING TO MAKE A
DECISIVE ACTION HERE AND FORCE
THE REBELS OUT.>> Suarez: AMY S,
SEVERAL EUROPEAN FOREIGN
MINISTERS TODAY SAID THEY'RE
GOING TO WAIT UNTIL THERE'S
VERIFICATION OF WHAT THEY SAW IN
THAT VIDEO.
THE TURKISH FOREIGN MINISTER
SPOKESMAN SAID HE SAW ALL HE
NEEDED TO SEE, THIS WAS CLEARLY
A CHEMICAL ATTACK.
WHEN VIDEO LIKE THIS ARRIVES OF
UNCERTAIN PROVENANCE, YOU DON'T
KNOW WHO SHOT IT, YOU DON'T KNOW
WHO THE PEOPLE ARE IN THE VIDEO,
HOW DO YOU DETERMINE WHETHER
IT'S THE REAL THING?
>> WELL, THE LAST INCIDENT THAT
THE WORLD SAW WHERE THERE WERE
CHEMICAL CASUALTIES ON THIS
SCALE WAS SADDAM HUSSEIN'S
ATTACK IN 1988 AGAINST A SMALL
TOWN, KURDISH VILLAGE.
THERE WEREN'T CELL PHONES AROUNS
OF IMAGES.
THE ONLY PICTURES I'VE EVER SEEN
OF THAT ARE STILL PHOTOGRAPHS.AS
ANYWHERE ELSE IN THE WORLD OF AN
INCIDENT OF THIS MAGNITUDE.
SO ALL SIGNS ARE POINTING TOSCUG
THAT HAPPENED WITHIN THE LAST 24
HOURS.
THAT MAY HINGE ON THE
VERIFIABILITY, THE AUTHENTICITY
OF THESE IMAGES, HOW DO YOU
SATISFY YOURSELF THAT YOU KNOW
WHAT YOU'RE SEEING, IT
HAPPENED, HOW MANY CASUALTIES
THERE ARE?
>> WELL, I THINK THE CASUALTY
TOTAL WILL BECOME CLEARER WITH
THE PASSAGE OF TIME.
THESE PEOPLE WERE TAKEN TO
SEVERAL DIFFERENT HOSPITALS AND
EVEN MAKESHIFT FACILITIES.
AND IT'S REALLY IMPOSSIBLE TO
KNOW FROM JUST VIDEO IMAGES WHAT
SPECIFIC CHEMICAL WAS INVOLVED.
THESE SYMPTOMS THAT YOU'RE
SEEING, THE TWITCHING, THE
PINPOINT PEW TILLS, SOMETIMES
CONVULSING ARE CONSISTENT WITH
EXPOSURE TO TOXIC CHEMICALS.
NOT NECESSARILY JUST SARIN OR
V.X., THE CLASS I CAN WARFARE
AGENTS.
AND THE INSPECTORS THAT ARE
THERE HAVE SAMPLES SAMPLES THATE
ABLE TO DETERMINE THAT IF
THEY'RE LET OUT OF THE HOTEL.
>> Suarez: WELL, THAT'S A GOOD
POINT.THE INSPECTION REGIME OFTN
INVOLVES NEGOTIATIONS BEFORE THE
TEAM ARRIVES ABOUT WHAT THEY'RE
GOING TO BE ABLE TO SEE, WHERE
THEY'RE GOING TO BE ABLE TO GO.
WHEN AN INCIDENT HAPPENS ONCE
THEY'RE ALREADY ON THE GROUND,
CAN YOU RENEGOTIATE THE TERMS
WHEN THEY'RE IN-COUNTRY?>> YOU .
THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT CERTAINLY
HAS DEMONSTRATED OVER THEAST P
SEVERAL YEARS THAT IN ANY
NEGOTIATIONS OVER ANY ACCESS
LIKE THIS IT'S A VERY DIFFICULT
PARTNER IN THOSE NEGOTIATIONS.
AS POSSIBLE THE ACTIVITY OF ANY
HUMAN TEAM OPERATING INSIDE
SYRIA.
IT PUTS CONDITIONS ON WHAT THEY
CAN DO.
IT REJECTS PROPOSALS THAT THEY
MAKE TO TAKE INSPECTION-TYPE
ACTIONS WHEN IT FEELS LIKE IT
DOESN'T WANT THAT TO HAPPEN.
SO THERE'S NO GUARANTEE THAT THE
U.N. INSPECTORS WILL BE ABLE TO
SEE ANYTHING OUTSIDE OF THEIR
HOTEL ROOM.
THE REGIME CLEARLY HAS A
SIGNIFICANT INTEREST IN DENYING
ACCESS TO THIS AREA.
IF THEY DO, IT WILL BE A SIGN
THAT THEY ARE, IN FACT, GUILTY
OF THIS PARTICULAR ACTION.>> SuS
SYRIA A SIGNATORY OF ANY
TREATIES THAT LIMIT THE
PRODUCTION AND USE OF CHEMICAL
WEAPONS?CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENN
WHICH DOES JUST THAT.
BUT 188 OTHER NATIONS ARE.
AND THIS IS THE TREATY THAT
OUTLAWS THE USE NOT JUST OF
SARIN AND V.X. BUT OF ANY TOXIC
CHEMICAL FOR MILITARY PURPOSES.
AND I AGREE WITH MR. WHITE THAT
IT LOOKS LIKE A CONCENTRATEDPRE.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT A
COMMANDER WHO IS KNOWLEDGEABLE
IN IDEAL CONDITIONS FOR HAVING A
GAS HANG IN THE SAME AREA.
IF YOU DID THIS IN THE MIDDLE OF
THE DAY IS WIND IS LIKELY TO
BLOW IT AWAY.
IN THESE PREDAWN HOURS IT'SCOOLD
THE GAS WILL JUST STAY WHERE
IT'S FIRED.
FAIRLY SMALL NUMBER OF PLAYERS
IN SYRIA WHO WOULD EVEN BE ABLE
TO CARRY OUT AN ATTACK LIKE
THIS?
VERY DIFFERENT FROM PREVIOUS
INCIDENT WHICH IS THE CASUALTY
TOTALS WERE RATHER SMALL AND
MAYBE ONE DEVICE WAS USED TO
DELIVER IT.THIS IS COORDINATED E
PREDAWN HOURS IN A QUANTITY OF
MATERIAL THAT'S PROBABLY
INCONSISTENT WITH ANYTHING OTHER
THAN SOMEBODY WHO'S BEEN MAKING
THIS STUFF AND HAS A DELIVERY
CAPABILITY THAT CAN PUT THAT
MUCH ON THE TARGET IN THAT SHORT
SIGNATORY, BUT THE WORLD IS FULL
OF THEM.
INCLUDING SOME OF THE MOST ABLE
NATIONS ON THE PLANET.
ARE THEY ON THE HOOK FOR SOME
KIND OF RESPONSE IF A
NON-SIGNATORY VIOLATES THE TERMS
OF THAT TREATY?
>> I THINK THEY'RE ON THE HOOK
IN TERMS OF THE MORALITY OF THE
SITUATION AND THE -- AND THE
CIRCUMSTANCES OF WHAT'S GOING ON
THERE.I DON'T KNOW IF THEY'RE RD
TO DO ANYTHING BY ANY OF THE --
ANY OF THE PROTOCOLS OR WHATEVER
BUT CERTAINLY THERE'S A MORAL
OBLIGATION TO TAKE ACTION HERE.,
PROBABLY BY THE SYRIAN
-SO THERE'S GOING TO BE PRESSURE
TO TAKE ACTION NOT JUST TO
PUNISH FOR WHAT HAPPENED HERE
BUT TO PREVENT ANY FURTHER
ACTION ALONG THESE LINES.
CONVENTION REQUIRES EVER STATE
THAT SIGNS IT TO AGREE TO
PROVIDE ASSISTANCE IN THE EVENT
THAT ANY OTHER MEMBER IS
THREATENED WITH OR UNDERSTOOD
GOES AN ATTACK.
NOW, SYRIA'S NOT A MEMBER, BUT-N
DECENCY HERE WHICH IS ONE OF THE
REASONS WHY I'VE ENCOURAGED
COUNTRIES TO PROVIDE DEFENSIVE
EQUIPMENT NOT JUST TO THE SYRIAN
REBELS BUT TO THE SYRIAN
CIVILIANS.
>> Suarez: IT'S PRETTY HARD TO
DEFEND AGAINST THIS KIND OF
THING, ISN'T IT?
>> WELL, A GAS MASK WILL GO A
LONG WAY TO HELP.
AND IT'S NOT IDEAL.
IDEALLY YOU WOULD BE ABLE TO
PROVIDE THEM WITH A DEFENSIVE
GARB THAT COVERS YOU ALL OVER.
BUT PRIOR TO 1991 WAR ISRAEL
EQUIPPED ITS ENTIRE CIVILIAN
POPULATION WITH GAS MASKS AND
WHAT YOU COULD SEE IN THESE
FILMS WAS THAT THE SYRIAN
CIVILIANS WERE TRYING TO
DECONTAMINATE THE VICTIMS, TO
WASH THEIR SKIN WHICH WOULD HELP
REDUCE THE POSSIBLE EFFECTS
THERE.SO GAS MASKS AND SOME SERS
COACHING ABOUT HOW TO
DECONTAMINATE AND DECONTAMINATE
FAST WILL REDUCE THE AMOUNT OF
-IT WON'T ELIMINATE IT.
>> Suarez: AMY SMITHSON,
JEFFREY WHITE, THANK YOU BOTH.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
"NEWSHOUR":
BRADLEY MANNING GETS 35 YEARS IN
JAIL; HOW THE N.S.A. SPIES ON
INTERNET ACTIVITY AND ELEANOR
HOLMES NORTON LOOKS BACK AT THE
MARCH ON WASHINGTON.
BUT FIRST, WITH THE OTHER NEWS
OF THE DAY.
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Holman: AN EGYPTIAN COURT
TODAY ORDERED THE RELEASE OF
EX-PRESIDENT HOSNI MUBARAK.
A HEARING WAS HELD AT TORA
PRISON, WHERE THE AILING
85-YEAR-OLD HAS BEEN DETAINED
FOR TWO YEARS.
ONCE FREED, HE'LL BE PLACED
UNDER HOUSE ARREST ON ORDERS OF
EGYPT'S PRIME MINISTER.
MUBARAK ALSO FACES CHARGES OF
FAILING TO PREVENT THE DEATHS OF
PROTESTERS IN THE 2011 UPRISING
THAT OUSTED HIM FROM POWER.
MEANWHILE THE EUROPEAN UNION
HELD EMERGENCY TALKS ON THE
EGYPTIAN CRISIS IN BRUSSELS.
ITS FOREIGN POLICY CHIEF,
CATHERINE ASHTON, SAID THE
E.U. MEMBER NATIONS STRONGLY
CONDEMN THE RECENT SPATE OF
VIOLENCE BETWEEN THE INTERIM
GOVERNMENT AND SUPPORTERS OF THE
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD.
>> WE'VE AGREED, AS WELL, TO
REVIEW THE ISSUE OF OUR
ASSISTANCE TO EGYPT WITH THE
UNDERSTANDING OF ASSISTANCE TO
THE MOST VULNERABLE GROUPS AND
TO CIVIL SOCIETY MUST
CONTINUE.
MEMBER STATES HAVE AGREED TO
SUSPEND EXPORT LICENCES TO EGYPT
OF ANY EQUIPMENT USED FOR
INTERNAL REPRESSION, AND TO
REASSESS THEIR EXPORT LICENSES
COVERED BY THE E.U. COMMON
POSITION.
>> Holman: THE U.S. STILL IS
WEIGHING WHETHER TO SUSPEND SOME
OF ITS $1.5 BILLION IN
ASSISTANCE TO EGYPT.
THE SOLDIER ACCUSED IN THE FORT
HOOD, TEXAS SHOOTING RAMPAGE
RESTED HIS CASE TODAY WITHOUT
PRESENTING A DEFENSE.
ARMY MAJOR NIDAL HASAN-- WHO
ECTEELD TO REPRESENT HIMSELF--
DID NOT TESTIFY OR CALL ANY
WITNESSES.
HASAN IS ACCUSED OF KILLING 13
PEOPLE AND WOUNDING 32 AT THE
MILITARY BASE IN 2009.
CLOSING ARGUMENTS ARE SET TO
BEGIN TOMORROW.
IF CONVICTED, HASAN COULD FACE
THE DEATH PENALTY.
STAFF SERGEANT ROBERT BALES
FACED RELATIVES OF THE 16 AFGHAN
CIVILIANS HE KILLED IN A 2011
ATTACK.
NINE FAMILY MEMBERS WERE FLOWN
FROM AFGHANISTAN FOR THE
SENTENCING HEARING AT JOINT BASE
LEWIS-McCHORD
OUTSIDE SEATTLE.
ONE MAN DESCRIBED THE IMPACT OF
LOSING
11 FAMILY MEMBERS IN THE ATTACK.
BALES PLEADED GUILTY IN JUNE TO
AVOID THE DEATH PENALTY.
THE JURY WILL DECIDE WHETHER HIS
LIFE SENTENCE WILL INCLUDE A
CHANCE FOR PAROLE.
THE MONTH OF JULY SAW A BIG
BOOST TO EXISTING HOME SALES.
THEY JUMPED 6.5%-- THE FASTEST
PACE IN MORE THAN THREE YEARS.
BUT FOR STOCKS ON WALL STREET,
THAT BRIGHT SPOT DIDN'T OUTWEHIG
NEWS FROM THE FEDERAL RESERVE
THAT IT COULD END ITS MASSIVE
BOND-BUYING PROGRAM SOON.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 105 POINTS
TO CLOSE AT 14,897.
THE NASDAQ FELL MORE THAN 13
POINTS TO CLOSE ABOVE 3,599.
THE LAST SET OF FOUR SECRET
AUDIO RECORDINGS MADE IN
PRESIDENT NIXON'S WHITE HOUSE
WAS RELEASED TODAY BY THE
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS
ADMINISTRATION.
IT COVERS A THREE MONTH SPAN
ENDING JULY 12, 1973-- THE DAY
BEFORE THE EXISTENCE OF THE
SECRET RECORDINGS, ORDERED BY
NIXON,  WAS REVEALED.
THE PERIOD INCLUDES A SOVIET
SUMMIT, THE END OF THE VIETNAM
WAR AND THE WATERGATE SCANDAL.
IN THIS EXCERPT, PRESIDENT NIXON
SPEAKS TO THEN-GOVERNOR OF
CALIFORNIA RONALD REAGAN ON
APRIL 30, 1973.
THAT'S THE DAY THE PRESIDENT
GAVE A NATIONAL ADDRESS AFTER
FIRING TWO TOP AIDES AS THE
WATERGATE SCANDAL INTENSIFIED.
>> Holman: THE RECORDINGS
RELEASED TODAY RUN 340 HOURS.
SOME 3,700 HOURS OF
CONVERSATIONS WERE TAPED.
700 HOURS REMAIN SEALED FOR
NATIONAL SECURITY AND PRIVACY
REASONS.
THE LONGTIME HOST OF NPR'S
"PIANO JAZZ" PROGRAM-- MARIAN
McPARTLAND-- HAS DIED AT HER
HOME IN LONG ISLAND, NEW YORK.
THE BRITISH-BORN JAZZ PIANIST
REACHED AN AUDIENCE OF MILLIONS
OVER HER FOUR DECADES ON THE
AIR.
SHE INTERVIEWED AND PLAYED DUETS
WITH MANY OF THE WORLD'S
GREATEST MUSICIANS.
SHE RECEIVED A LIFETIME GRAMMY
AWARD IN 2004.
MARIAN McPARTLAND WAS 95 YEARS
OLD.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO GWEN.
>> Ifill: PRIVATE BRADLEY
MANNING--THE ARMY SOLDIER
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE LARGEST
CLASSIFED DATA LEAK IN U.S.
HISTORY-- WAS SENTENCED TODAY TO
35 YEARS IN MILITARY PRISON.
MANNING -WHO PROVIDED THE
WEBSITE WIKILEAKS WITH HUNDREDS
OF THOUSANDS OF SECRET MILITARY
AND DIPLOMATIC DOCUMENTS - WAS
FLANKED BY HIS ATTORNEYS AS
MILITARY JUDGE COLONEL DENISE
LIND ANNOUNCED THE PUNISHMENT
WITHOUT EXPLANATION DURING A
BRIEF HEARING THIS MORNING.
MANNING'S ATTORNEY DAVID COOMBS
SPOKE TO REPORTERS AFTERWARDS.
> PFC. MANNING WAS ONE OF THE
BRAVE AMERICANS WHO WAS NOT
WILLING TO REMAIN SILENT.
INSTEAD HE DECIDED TO PROVIDE US
WITH INFORMATION THAT HE
BELIEVED WOULD SPARK REFORMS,
WOULD SPARK DEBATE, AND HE
PROVIDED US WITH INFORMATION HE
the world." //
The time to end Brad's suffering
is now. The time for our
President to focus on protecting
whistleblowers, instead of
punishing them is now.
I'M JOINED NOW BY
CHARLIE SAVAGE WHO HAS BEEN
COVERING THE MANNING TRIAL FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES.IT IS THE LOR
SENTENCE EVER HANDED DOWN IN THE
INVOLVING THE LEAK OF GOVERNMENT
SECRETS TO THE NEWS MEDIA TO BE
REPORTED TO THE PUBLIC.
>> Ifill: SO WE'RE ALSO
TALKING ABOUT A REDUCTION IN
RANK AS WELL AS DISHONORABLE
DISCHARGE.
DOES THAT ADD TO THE STING AS
WELL?
TO THE LOWEST RANK OF PRIVATE
AND A DISHONORABLE DISCHARGE WAS
EXPECTED AND IS SORT OF A MINOR
THING.THE 35-YEAR PRISON SENTENS
THE IMPORTANT FACTOR.
A STAGGERING AMOUNT OF TIME
COMPARED TO OTHER SENTENCES THAT
CONVICTED LEAKERS.
SENTENCES CAN YOU DRAW THE LINK
TO HERE?
>> WELL, YOU HAVE TO REMEMBER
THAT THERE HAVE BEEN VERY FEW
LICVICTIONS OF PEOPLE FOR
CONSUMPTION AT ALL IN THIS
COUNTRY.
THE FIRST TIME THAT HAPPENED WAS
IN 1985 OR '84 WHERE A FORMER
NAVY ANALYST WAS SENTENCED TO
TWO YEARS.
AND IT WAS SO RARE THAT
HIM BECAUSE IT WAS SORT OF
UNFAIR THAT THIS ONE GUY HAD
BEEN CONVICTED FOR SOMETHING
THAT HAPPENS ALL THE TIME.
UNDER THIS ADMINISTRATION, OF
COURSE, THAT WE'VE SEEN, AS HAS
BEEN WELL DOCUMENTED, A FLURRY,
A CRACKDOWN ON LEAKING.
THERE HAVE BEEN A FEW CASES.
ONE RESULTED IN THE SENTENCE OF
ONE YEAR PROBATION AND COMMUNITY
SERVICE.
PRISON.
AND SO 35 YEARS IS A CATEGORICAL
-OF COURSE, THE SCALE OF PRIVATE
MANNING'S LEAKS WAS ALSO UNLIKE
->> Ifill: BUT THEY WERE ASKING.
FOR MORE.
THEY WERE ASKING FOR 60 YEARS,
RIGHT?WHICH WOULD HAVE BEEN MADE
THEMLESS ELIGIBLE FOR PAROLE IN
SUCH A SHORT AMOUNT OF TIME?
>> THE PROSECUTORS WERE, INDEED,
ASKING FOR 60 YEARS.
SOUGHT TO CONVICT HIM ON A
CHARGE THAT COULD RESULT IN A
LIFE SENTENCE AND PRIVATE
MANNING HIMSELF UNILATERALLY
PLED GUILTY TO CHARGES THAT
WOULD PUT HIM BEHIND BARS UP TO
20 YEAR.
SO 35 YEARS SPLITS THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THAT 20 AND
THAT 60.
MY UNDERSTANDING OF THE MILITARY
JUSTICE SYSTEM, WHICH IS A
LITTLE BIT DIFFERENT THAN THE
FEDERAL CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM,
IS THAT ANY SENTENCE OVER 30
YEARS MAKES ONE ELIGIBLE FOR
PAROLE AFTER TEN YEARS.
AND SO AN EVEN LONGER SENTENCE
MIGHT NOT HAVE CHANGED THE
OUTCOME IF SOMEDAY HE GETS OUT
ON PAROLE WHEN HE BECOMES
ELIGIBLE FOR IT, WHICH IS A BIG
IF.
-HE WAS IN COURT TODAY FOR THIS
N.RY BRIEF ADJUDICATIO
WHAT HAPPENED?WAS THERE ANY KIN?
>> I WAS THERE WATCHING FROM A
CLOSED-CIRCUIT TELEVISION FEED
AND A COLLEAGUE OF MINE WAS IN
THE CRTROOUOM.
SHE DESCRIBED HIM AS SITTING
VERY QUIETLY WITH HIS HAND
CLASPED, WHISPERING TO HIS
LAWYER NERVOUSLY BEFORE THEHEAR.
HE STOOD -- WE COULD WATCH HIM
ON THE SCREEN AS WELL.
HE STOOD AT ATTENTION ALONGSIDE
HIS LAWYER AND THE PROSECUTION
IN THIS SORT OF TWO-MINUTE
HEARING AS THE JUDGE RATTLED IT
OFF, GAVELED IT CLOSED AND
WALKED OUT.
COURTROOM MY COLLEAGUE TOLD ME
GUARD FLANKED HIM AND SORT OF
HUSTLED HIM OUT OF THE FRONT OF
THE COURTROOM AS SUPPORTERS WHOE
BACK OF THE COURTROOM STARTED
SHOUTING MESSAGES OF SUPPORT TO
HIM.
SOMETHING OF A CAUSE CELEB IN
SOME CIRCUMSTANCES AND NOW HIS
ATTORNEY IS ASKING FOR A PARDON.
THAT WAS LONG AND INTEREST NEWS
CONFERENCE HE TKWA*EUF TODAY
AFTERWARD MAKING THAT CASE.>> TA
MOVEMENT HAS ORGANIZED ITSELF
AROUND PRIVATE MANNING AND SORT
OF HELD HIM UP AS AN ICONIC
FIGURE AND HIS LEAKS AS A HEROIC
ACT TO BE EMULATED BY OTHERS,
THEY HOPE.
AND I THINK CERTAINLY SEE
THE RECENT LEAKS BY N.S.A.
CONTRACTOR STPHOEPBD THAT
BROUGHT SO MUCH TO LIGHT ABOUT
DOMESTIC SURVEILLANCE ACTIVITIES
BY THE ENSAY IN THIS TRADITION
OF THE MEG LEAKER THAT --
MEGALEAKER PRIVATE MANNING
INNOVATED AS IT WERE.
TOO, THIS OPEN GOVERNMENT
MOVEMENT, OF COURSE TO HISCRITIA
TRAITOR.
WHO BETRAYED THE TRUST THEUNITET
INTO HIM.
EITHER WAY, A SINGULAR FIGURE.
A WORLD HISTORICAL FIGURE, I
WOULD SAY, IN OUR TIME.
>> Ifill: H ATTORNEY,
MR. COOMBS, SAID THE FIGHT IS
NOT OVER.
SO WHAT ARE THE OPTIONS,
ASSUMING THAT A PARDON IS NOT
EASILY GETTABLE?
>> WELL, THE NEXT STEP IS THAT
THE SO-CALLED CONVENING
AUTHORITY, THE GENERAL THAT RUNS
THE MILITARY DI OF
WASHINGTON, WILL HAVE TO REVIEW
THE SENTENCE.
HE HAS THE ABILITY TO ACCEPT IT
AS IS OR TO REDUCE IT BUT NOT TO
ADD TO IT.
SO THAT'S THE FIRST OPPORTUNITY
FOR CLEMENCY, IF YOU WILL.
THEN IT WILL BE AUTOMATICALLY
APPEALED TO THE FIRST STAGE OF
REVIEW BY THE ARMY CRIMINAL
COURT OF APPEALS.
SEVERAL LEVELS ALL THE TRY THEST
DEFENSE TEAM WANTS TO KEEP
FIGHTING THAT FIGHT.
SAVAGE, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Suarez: NOW TO NEW
REVELATIONS ABOUT GOVERNMENT
SURVEILLANCE OF INTERNET TRAFFIC
THROUGHOUT THE U.S.
MARGARET WARNER HAS THE STORY.
>> Warner: THE NATION'S TOP
INTELLIGENCE OFFICIAL TODAY
DECLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS SHOWING
THAT FOR THREE YEARS, THE
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY, OR
N.S.A., COLLECTED MORE THAN
50,000 EMAILS A YEAR BETWEEN
AMERICANS WITH NO CONNECTION TO
TERRORISM.
THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE
SURVEILLANCE COURT IN 2011 RULED
THE COLLECTION METHODS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
TODAY'S DOCUMENTS SHOW CHANGES
THE N.S.A MADE SO THE PROGRAM--
DESIGNED TO TARGET FOREIGN
INTELLIGENCE-- COULD CONTINUE.
THE RELEASE CAME HOURS AFTER THE
"WALL STREET JOURNAL" REPORTED
THE N.S.A. HAS BUILT A
SURVEILLANCE NETWORK COVERING
ROUGHLY 75% OF ALL U.S. INTERNET
TRAFFIC, INCLUDING EMAILS, WEB
SEARCHES AND INTERNET PHONE
CALLS OF AMERICANS.
WE'RE JOINED NOW BY SIOBHAN
GORMAN, INTELLIGENCE
CORRESPONDENT FOR THE "WALL
STREET JOURNAL."
SIOBHAN, THANK YOU FOR JOINING
US.
NEWLY CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS AND
WHY WERE THEY RELEASED TODAY?
-THIS SORT OF BROAD CAPABILITY O
INTERCEPT MESSAGES IN THE UNITED
STATES.
LITTLE BIT UNCLEAR, ALTHOUGH IT
MAY BE A RESPONSE TO A PARTIAL
DOCUMENT THAT WAS PART OF THIS T
STPHO*EPBD LEAKS THAT CAME OUT
LAST WEEK AND IT MAY HAVE BEEN
N.S.A.'S DESIRE TO AT LEAST PUT
SOME MORE CONTEXT AROUND THAT
SNIPPET THAT WAS RELEASED LAST
WEEK THAT JUST SAID THAT THE
COURT RULED THAT N.S.A. VIOLATED
THE CONSTITUTION WITH A
PARTICULAR TYPE OF COLLECTION
PROGRAM BUT DIDN'T REALLY
EXPLAIN WHYHAT HAD BEEN
DONE TO RESOLVE THE PROBLEM.
>> Warner: SO NOW W CANE READ
THAT OPINION.
WHAT WAS THE TONE OF THAT?
>> THE TONE WAS A PRETTY SMASH
REBUKE.-CRITICIZED THE GOVERNMER
NOT TAKING STRONGER MEASURES TO
PROTECT PRIVACY.
IT CRITICIZED THE GOVERNMENT FOR
NOT EVEN TRYING TO FIND NEW WAYS
TO COLLECT INFORMATION SO IT
WOULD HAVE THESE KIND OF
VIOLATIONS.
SAID, YOU KNOW, THISS SHARPEST
IS THE THIRD TIME IN THE LAST --
INLESS THAN THREE YEARS THAT WES
MISREPRESENTED ITS COLLECTION
PROGRAMS TO THE COURTS.
SO WE'VE HEARD ABOUT THE CHECKS
THE COURT PLACES ON SURVEILLANCE
AND THIS OPINION SHOWS ON THE
ONE HAND THAT THE COURT DOES
PROVIDE A MAJOR CHECK BUT ON THE
OTHER IT'S AFTER THE FACT AND
THE N.S.A. HAS A FAIR AMOUNT OF
LEEWAY TO CONSTRUCT ITS
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS AND
THERE'S A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF
SELF-POLICING THAT GOES ON
THERE.>> Warner: THIS PROGRAM NW
CONTINUES.
DID THE FIXES THE N.S.A. MADE,
DID THEY COMPLETELY ELIMINATE
THE PROBLEM OF E-MAILS BETWEEN
AMERICANS HERE IN THE U.S.
GETTING THROUGH THE -- GETTING
THROUGH AND BEING LOOKED AT BYT?
>> WELL, IT MINIMIZED THE
PROBLEM.
HAPPENING AND SO THE PROBABILITY
THAT WHOLLY DOMESTIC
COMMUNICATIONS ARE BEING PICKED
UP BY THE N.S.A. IS JUST THE
SAME AS IT HAS BEEN AT LEAST
SINCE 2008.
THE WAY THAT N.S.A. HANDLES
THOSE COMMUNICATIONS NOW IS
SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT.
THEY ARE TRYING TO BASICALLY
SEGREGATE AND QUARANTINE THE
SETS OF COMMUNICATIONS THAT ARE
LIKELY TO CONTAIN WHOLLY
DOMESTIC COMMUNICATIONS AND
HANDLE THEM SO THAT THEY DON'T
GET DISTRIBUTED THROUGHOUT
N.S.A. DATABASES OR INTO
INTELLIGENCE REPORTS AND MAKE
THEIR WAY KIND OF THROUGHOUT THE
SYSTEM IN A A SEARCHABLE FORM.
>> Warner: AND YOUR PIECE, THE
ONE YOU COAUTHORED TODAY, TALKED
ABOUT A MUCH BROADER PROGRAM.
BECAUSE YOU WEREN'T TALKING JUST
ABOUT E-MAILS BUT ALSO INTERNET
SEARCHES AND SKYPE-LIKE PHONE
CALLS.IS -- HOW DOES THAT WORK.
HOW IS -- HOW ARE THE
COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN OR AMONG
AMERICANS BEING PROTECTED?
OR ARE THEY-- AS I THINK YOU
REPORTED-- GETTING THROUGH TO
THE N.S.A.?
>> RIGHT, WELL ACTUALLY -- YEAH,
WHAT'S INTERESTING IS THAT THIS
COURT RULING AND THESE
DISCLOSURES ACTUALLY PROVE A
POINT THAT A NUMBER OF PEOPLE I
HAD SPOKEN WITH WERE MAKING AND
THE VIOLATIONS THAT THE COURT
ORDER DESCRIBES BEAR DIRECTLY ON
THE PROGRAM THAT I DESCRIBED
TODAY.THE PROGRAM THAT I DESCRID
TODAY IS THE SAME ONE,
ESSENTIALLY.
IT'S A SET OF PROGRAMS, BUT
THOUGH SET OF ACTIVITIES ARE
WHAT THE COURT WAS CRITICIZING.
ARRANGEMENTS THAT THE NATIONALSO
UNDER A COURT ORDER WITH MAJOR
U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
PROVIDERS.
COLLECTIVELY, THOSE PROVIDERS
COVER 75% OF UNITED STATES
COMMUNICATIONS.
THE N.S.A. AND THE TELEPHONE
COMPANIES HAVE CONSTRUCTED SORT
OF A TWO-STEP FILTERING SYSTEM
THAT MEANS THAT THE
TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPANIES DO
THE FIRST CUT OF FILTERING BASED
ON THE GUIDELINES THAT N.S.A.
PROVIDE UNDER THE COURT ORDER
AND THEN THEY PASS A SUBSET OF
THAT INFORMATION TO N.S.A., THEY
CALL IT A DATA STREAM.
N.S.A. THEN TAKES THAT DATA
STREAM AND FILTERS IT AGAIN
AGAINST SPECIFIC CRITERIA THAT
IT HAS, SUCH AS AN E-MAILADDREST
PROTOCOL ADDRESSES.
>> Warner: SO IN THAT DATA
STREAM THAT GETS TO THE N.S.A.
AND THEN IN THE PART OF THAT
DATA STREAM THAT THE N.S.A.
STORE OR ANALYZES, ARE THERE
COMMUNICATIONS OR INTERNET
SEARCHES DONE BY AMERICANS
STRICTLY DOMESTIC IN NATURE OR
BETWEEN AMERICANS IN THE U.S.?
>> YES,HE DOCUMENTS THAT WE
SAW TODAY SHOW THAT THAT WHOLE
PROCESS THAT I JUST DESCRIBED AS
A FLAW WHEN IT COMES TO
PROTECTING AMERICAN
COMMUNICATIONS.
OF COMMUNICATIONS, JUST BECAUSE
OF THE WAY TECHNOLOGY HAS
EVOLVED, ARE BUNDLED TOGETHER.
AND SO YOU MAY END UP WITH ABUNE
SOME SMALL PORTION OF IT
CONTAINS INFORMATION THAT IS
RESPONSIVE TO WHAT N.S.A. IS
LOOKING FOR WITH ITS FOREIGN
INTELLIGENCE FILTERS, BUT THEY
HAVE TO HAND OVER THE WHOLE
BUNDLE OF COMMUNICATIONS, WHICH
MAY ALSO INCLUDE WHOLLY DOMESTIC
COMMUNICATIONS.
DECOUPLE SOME OF THESE SETS OF
GORMAN, "WALL STREET JOURNAL,"
COMMUNICATIONS.
>> Ifill: NEXT: A SECOND LOOK AT
GORMAN, "WALL STREET JOURNAL,"
THE STORY OF A CHICAGO THEATER
>> Ifill: NEXT: A SECOND LOOK AT
COMPANY WHERE THE SCRIPTS ARE
THE STORY OF A CHICAGO THEATER
DRAWN FROM THE REAL LIVES OF THE
COMPANY WHERE THE SCRIPTS ARE
YOUNG PERFORMERS.
DRAWN FROM THE REAL LIVES OF THE
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY.
YOUNG PERFORMERS.
>> I DID IT!
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY.
I REALLY DID IT.
>> I DID IT!
I RAN AWAY!
I REALLY DID IT.
I FELT GUILTY AS I WAS LEAVING.
I RAN AWAY!
>> Reporter: IN A NEW PLAY
I FELT GUILTY AS I WAS LEAVING.
CALLED "HOME/LAND", TWO YOUNG
>> Reporter: IN A NEW PLAY
LOVERS-- PLAYED BY TWO
CALLED "HOME/LAND", TWO YOUNG
TEENAGERS-- LEAVE BEHIND THEIR
LOVERS-- PLAYED BY TWO
SMALL VILLAGE IN MEXICO FOR A
TEENAGERS-- LEAVE BEHIND THEIR
LONG AND DANGEROUS TRIP TO THE
SMALL VILLAGE IN MEXICO FOR A
UNITED STATES.
LONG AND DANGEROUS TRIP TO THE
>> MAMI WILL BE SAD, BUT WE'LL
UNITED STATES.
GET MARRIED AND THEY'LL FORGIVE
>> MAMI WILL BE SAD, BUT WE'LL
US.
GET MARRIED AND THEY'LL FORGIVE
>> Reporter: IT'S A SCENE THAT
US.
TELLS OF THE PAIN AND PROMISE OF
>> Reporter: IT'S A SCENE THAT
ONE KIND OF IMMIGRANT
TELLS OF THE PAIN AND PROMISE OF
EXPERIENCE.
ONE KIND OF IMMIGRANT
>> TELL ME OUR STORY ANDRES.
EXPERIENCE.
TELL ME HOW THIS HAPPENED, HOW
>> TELL ME OUR STORY ANDRES.
.WE HAPPENED.
TELL ME HOW THIS HAPPENED, HOW
TELL ME SO I BELIEVE.
.WE HAPPENED.
>> Reporter: In the play,
TELL ME SO I BELIEVE.
several characters say to one
>> Reporter: In the play,
another, "tell me our story".
several characters say to one
The line reflects the guiding
another, "tell me our story".
spirit of an ambitious youth
The line reflects the guiding
theatER program that explores
spirit of an ambitious youth
real life stories from this
theatER program that explores
diverse Chicago neighborhood.
real life stories from this
ALBANY PARK, IN NORTHWEST
diverse Chicago neighborhood.
CHICAGO, IS A CLASSIC GATEWAY
ALBANY PARK, IN NORTHWEST
NEIGHBORHOOD, HOME TO
CHICAGO, IS A CLASSIC GATEWAY
GENERATIONS OF IMMIGRANTS,
NEIGHBORHOOD, HOME TO
BEGINNING WITH GERMANS AND
GENERATIONS OF IMMIGRANTS,
SWEDES ITHE N 19th CENTURY.
BEGINNING WITH GERMANS AND
TODAY, MORE THAN 40 DIFFERENT
SWEDES ITHE N 19th CENTURY.
LANGUAGES CAN BE HEARD IN ITS
TODAY, MORE THAN 40 DIFFERENT
STREETS AND HOMES.
LANGUAGES CAN BE HEARD IN ITS
IT WAS HERE, 15 YEARS AGO,  THAT
STREETS AND HOMES.
DAVID FEINER AND HIS WIFE LAURA
IT WAS HERE, 15 YEARS AGO,  THAT
WILEY FOUNDED THE ALBANY PARK
DAVID FEINER AND HIS WIFE LAURA
THEATER PROJECT.
WILEY FOUNDED THE ALBANY PARK
>> I'M SO PROUD OF WHAT YOU ALL
THEATER PROJECT.
HAVE GIVEN TO THIS PLAY.
>> I'M SO PROUD OF WHAT YOU ALL
>> Reporter: THEIR IDEA: TO WORK
HAVE GIVEN TO THIS PLAY.
WITH YOUNG PEOPLE, WHO WOULD
>> Reporter: THEIR IDEA: TO WORK
RESEARCH, WRITE, AND PERFORM
WITH YOUNG PEOPLE, WHO WOULD
PLAYS THAT TELL THEIR OWN
RESEARCH, WRITE, AND PERFORM
STORIES.
PLAYS THAT TELL THEIR OWN
>> THE IDEA OF WORKING IN A
STORIES.
NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE YOU WOULD
>> THE IDEA OF WORKING IN A
HAVE STORIES THAT CAME FROM
NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE YOU WOULD
LITERALLY ALL OVER THE WORLD,
HAVE STORIES THAT CAME FROM
AND THAT WERE FRESH, THAT WERE
LITERALLY ALL OVER THE WORLD,
IMMEDIATE.
AND THAT WERE FRESH, THAT WERE
YOU'D ALSO HAVE ACCESS TO
IMMEDIATE.
CULTURAL TRADITIONS FROM ALL
YOU'D ALSO HAVE ACCESS TO
OVER THE WORLD.
CULTURAL TRADITIONS FROM ALL
THAT WAS THRILLING!
OVER THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: LAURA WILEY DIED IN
THAT WAS THRILLING!
2007 OF OVARIAN CANCER.
>> Reporter: LAURA WILEY DIED IN
DAVID HAS KEPT ON.
2007 OF OVARIAN CANCER.
AND THE ALBANY PARK THEATER
DAVID HAS KEPT ON.
PROJECT-- NOW WITH A STAFF OF 6
AND THE ALBANY PARK THEATER
AND 23 YOUNG MEMBERS-- HAS BUILT
PROJECT-- NOW WITH A STAFF OF 6
A STRONG AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAM
AND 23 YOUNG MEMBERS-- HAS BUILT
THAT'S PRODUCED MORE THAN 50
A STRONG AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAM
PLAYS.
THAT'S PRODUCED MORE THAN 50
>> I WAS BORN INTO FOOD STAMPS.
PLAYS.
>> Reporter: TAKING ON SUBJECTS
>> I WAS BORN INTO FOOD STAMPS.
SUCH AS POVERTY, CHILD ABUSE AND
>> Reporter: TAKING ON SUBJECTS
RACISM-- ISSUES THAT THE
SUCH AS POVERTY, CHILD ABUSE AND
STUDENTS THEMSELVES CONFRONT.
RACISM-- ISSUES THAT THE
>> SOME OF THEM HAVE LIVED IN
STUDENTS THEMSELVES CONFRONT.
POVERTY AND THEY UNDERSTAND SOME
>> SOME OF THEM HAVE LIVED IN
OF THE MOST DIFFICULT AND
POVERTY AND THEY UNDERSTAND SOME
UNPLEASANT SUBJECTS INTIMATELY.
OF THE MOST DIFFICULT AND
AS A THEATER ARTIST, I WANT TO
UNPLEASANT SUBJECTS INTIMATELY.
BE ABLE TO PARTICIPATE IN SOME
AS A THEATER ARTIST, I WANT TO
OF THE MOST SIGNIFICANT
BE ABLE TO PARTICIPATE IN SOME
DISCUSSIONS AND DEBATES
OF THE MOST SIGNIFICANT
HAPPENING IN OUR WORLD.
DISCUSSIONS AND DEBATES
AND I WANT TO DO THAT WITH
HAPPENING IN OUR WORLD.
TEENAGERS.
AND I WANT TO DO THAT WITH
>> Reporter: MAGGIE POPADIAK IS
TEENAGERS.
THE COMPANY'S ASSOCIATE
>> Reporter: MAGGIE POPADIAK IS
DIRECTOR.
THE COMPANY'S ASSOCIATE
>> WHEN PEOPLE JOIN A.P.T.P.,
DIRECTOR.
THEY COME BECAUSE THEIR FRIENDS
>> WHEN PEOPLE JOIN A.P.T.P.,
EITHER DRAGGED THEM, OR THEY
THEY COME BECAUSE THEIR FRIENDS
HEAR THAT WE HAVE A KITCHEN, OR
EITHER DRAGGED THEM, OR THEY
THERE'S A CUTE GIRL THERE. IS HL
HEAR THAT WE HAVE A KITCHEN, OR
AFTER ALL.
THERE'S A CUTE GIRL THERE. IS HL
>> IT IS HIGH SCHOOL AFTER ALL.
AFTER ALL.
BUAT TT HE SAME TIME, PEOPLE
>> IT IS HIGH SCHOOL AFTER ALL.
COME HERE AND THEY SHOW UP AND
BUAT TT HE SAME TIME, PEOPLE
REALIZE ITS MORE THAN JUST THE
COME HERE AND THEY SHOW UP AND
OPPORTUNITY TO BE ON STAGE AND
REALIZE ITS MORE THAN JUST THE
BE AN ACTRESS.
OPPORTUNITY TO BE ON STAGE AND
I MEAN WE'RE TELLING THE STORIES
BE AN ACTRESS.
OF PEOPLE WHO ARE OFTEN IGNORED
I MEAN WE'RE TELLING THE STORIES
OR STIGMATIZED.
OF PEOPLE WHO ARE OFTEN IGNORED
SO JUST SHARING THOSE RESILIENT
OR STIGMATIZED.
STORIES ON STAGE, A LOT OF THEM
SO JUST SHARING THOSE RESILIENT
STAY BECAUSE THE STORIES MEAN SO
STORIES ON STAGE, A LOT OF THEM
MUCH TO THEM.
STAY BECAUSE THE STORIES MEAN SO
>> Reporter: MAGGIE, IN FACT,
MUCH TO THEM.
WAS HERSELF ONE OF THE FIRST
>> Reporter: MAGGIE, IN FACT,
STUDENTS TO JOIN THE COMPANY.
WAS HERSELF ONE OF THE FIRST
HER PARENTS HAD FLED COMMUNIST
STUDENTS TO JOIN THE COMPANY.
POLAND AND COME TO CHICAGO IN
HER PARENTS HAD FLED COMMUNIST
THE 1970s.
POLAND AND COME TO CHICAGO IN
BUT HER FATHER DIED WHEN MAGGIE
THE 1970s.
WAS VERY YOUNG AND HER MOTHER,
BUT HER FATHER DIED WHEN MAGGIE
WORKING AS A MAID,  BATTLED
WAS VERY YOUNG AND HER MOTHER,
ALCOHOLISM.
WORKING AS A MAID,  BATTLED
THE THEATER GROUP BECAME, FIRST,
ALCOHOLISM.
A REFUGE AND THEN SOMETHING
THE THEATER GROUP BECAME, FIRST,
MORE, WHEN MAGGIE WROTE A PLAY
A REFUGE AND THEN SOMETHING
ABOUT HER MOTHER'S EXPERIENCE.
MORE, WHEN MAGGIE WROTE A PLAY
>> SO HER STRUGGLE AND HER
ABOUT HER MOTHER'S EXPERIENCE.
TRIUMPH WAS SOMETHING THAT WE
>> SO HER STRUGGLE AND HER
PUT ON THE STAGE.
TRIUMPH WAS SOMETHING THAT WE
AND SEEING THAT WAS-- FOR MY
PUT ON THE STAGE.
FAMILY-- IT BECAME A HEALING
AND SEEING THAT WAS-- FOR MY
PROCESS.
FAMILY-- IT BECAME A HEALING
THROUGH HER COMING TO SEE THE
PROCESS.
PLAY, WE WERE ABLE TO HAVE A
THROUGH HER COMING TO SEE THE
CONVERSATION ABOUT WHAT THAT
PLAY, WE WERE ABLE TO HAVE A
MEANT FOR US AND HOW THAT MADE
CONVERSATION ABOUT WHAT THAT
US A STRONG FAMILY.
MEANT FOR US AND HOW THAT MADE
>> WE TOOK A BOAT ON THE OCEAN.
US A STRONG FAMILY.
25 OF US.
>> WE TOOK A BOAT ON THE OCEAN.
>> Reporter: WITH "HOME/LAND",
25 OF US.
A.P.T.P. HAS TAKEN ON PERHAPS
>> Reporter: WITH "HOME/LAND",
ITS MOST CONTROVERSIAL SUBJECT
A.P.T.P. HAS TAKEN ON PERHAPS
YET: ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION.
ITS MOST CONTROVERSIAL SUBJECT
IT'S EXPLORED THROUGH A SERIES
YET: ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION.
OF VIGNETTES AND STORIES,
IT'S EXPLORED THROUGH A SERIES
INCLUDING ONE OF A YOUNG
OF VIGNETTES AND STORIES,
PALESTINIAN WOMAN WHO CAME TO
INCLUDING ONE OF A YOUNG
THE U.S. AS A CHILD.
PALESTINIAN WOMAN WHO CAME TO
>> WE JUST NEED YOUR I.D.
THE U.S. AS A CHILD.
>> MY I.D.?
>> WE JUST NEED YOUR I.D.
>> FOR THE PAPERWORK.
>> MY I.D.?
>> I HAVE MY STUDENT I.D.
>> FOR THE PAPERWORK.
>> BIRTH CERTIFICATE?
>> I HAVE MY STUDENT I.D.
>> IT'S FROM JORDAN.
>> BIRTH CERTIFICATE?
>> PASSPORT?
>> IT'S FROM JORDAN.
>> JORDAN.
>> PASSPORT?
>> SOCIAL SECURITY CARD?
>> JORDAN.
>> YES, BUT IT SAYS NOT VALID
>> SOCIAL SECURITY CARD?
FOR WORK.
>> YES, BUT IT SAYS NOT VALID
>> Reporter: IN ANOTHER SCENE A
FOR WORK.
MEXICAN-BORN FATHER, HELD IN A
>> Reporter: IN ANOTHER SCENE A
DETENTION CENTER AND THREATENED
MEXICAN-BORN FATHER, HELD IN A
WITH DEPORTATION, IS VISITED BY
DETENTION CENTER AND THREATENED
HIS SON.
WITH DEPORTATION, IS VISITED BY
>> WHY ARE YOU HERE?
HIS SON.
WHY ARE YOU HERE?
>> WHY ARE YOU HERE?
DID YOU DO SOMETHING WRONG?
WHY ARE YOU HERE?
>> Reporter: THESE EXPERIENCES,
DID YOU DO SOMETHING WRONG?
TOO, REFLECT THE REAL-LIVES OF
>> Reporter: THESE EXPERIENCES,
THE YOUNG ACTORS, SOME OF WHOM
TOO, REFLECT THE REAL-LIVES OF
ARE THEMSELVES UNDOCUMENTED OR
THE YOUNG ACTORS, SOME OF WHOM
HAVE FAMILY MEMBERS WHO ARE.
ARE THEMSELVES UNDOCUMENTED OR
THEY KNOW THIS IS TOUGH
HAVE FAMILY MEMBERS WHO ARE.
TERRITORY.
THEY KNOW THIS IS TOUGH
AND SAY THEIR GOAL ISN'T A
TERRITORY.
POLITICAL STATEMENT, BUT TO
AND SAY THEIR GOAL ISN'T A
HUMANIZE THE ISSUE.
POLITICAL STATEMENT, BUT TO
17-YEAR-OLD BLADIMIR ORDUNO IS
HUMANIZE THE ISSUE.
ONE OF THE YOUNG WRITER/ACTORS.
17-YEAR-OLD BLADIMIR ORDUNO IS
>> A LOT OF PEOPLE DON'T KNOW
ONE OF THE YOUNG WRITER/ACTORS.
ABOUT THESE THINGS.
>> A LOT OF PEOPLE DON'T KNOW
THAT'S WHY WE COME UP HERE AND
ABOUT THESE THINGS.
TELL THEM.
THAT'S WHY WE COME UP HERE AND
THAT'S WHY WE GO OUT INTO OUR
TELL THEM.
COMMUNITY AND GATHER THE
THAT'S WHY WE GO OUT INTO OUR
STORIES.
COMMUNITY AND GATHER THE
TO SHARE WITH A LOT MORE PEOPLE
STORIES.
THAT DON'T KNOW WHAT'S REALLY
TO SHARE WITH A LOT MORE PEOPLE
GOING ON.
THAT DON'T KNOW WHAT'S REALLY
>> Reporter: ORDUNO, WHO WILL
GOING ON.
ATTEND POMONA COLLEGE ON A FULL
>> Reporter: ORDUNO, WHO WILL
SCHOLARSHIP NEXT FALL, IS
ATTEND POMONA COLLEGE ON A FULL
HIMSELF AN EXAMPLE OF ANOTHER
SCHOLARSHIP NEXT FALL, IS
KEY GOAL OF THE PROJECT: ONE
HIMSELF AN EXAMPLE OF ANOTHER
THAT GOES BEYOND THE STAGE AND
KEY GOAL OF THE PROJECT: ONE
INTO THE CLASSROOM.
THAT GOES BEYOND THE STAGE AND
>> LET'S REVIEW EVERYTHING
INTO THE CLASSROOM.
AGAIN.
>> LET'S REVIEW EVERYTHING
>> Reporter: IT HAS AN
AGAIN.
AFTER-SCHOOL TUTORING PROGRAM
>> Reporter: IT HAS AN
AND OFFERS COLLEGE COUNSELING
AFTER-SCHOOL TUTORING PROGRAM
THAT MOST OF THESE YOUNG PEOPLE
AND OFFERS COLLEGE COUNSELING
WOULD NEVER OTHERWISE GET.
THAT MOST OF THESE YOUNG PEOPLE
>> A.P.T.P. GAVE ME THE HOPE
WOULD NEVER OTHERWISE GET.
THAT I CAN GO TO COLLEGE.
>> A.P.T.P. GAVE ME THE HOPE
AND SO THROUGHOUT MY HIGH SCHOOL
THAT I CAN GO TO COLLEGE.
YEARS, I STARTED TO DO THE BEST
AND SO THROUGHOUT MY HIGH SCHOOL
THING I CAN, STRAIGHT-A STUDENT
YEARS, I STARTED TO DO THE BEST
AND EVERYTHING.
THING I CAN, STRAIGHT-A STUDENT
>> Reporter: WAS THERE THE
AND EVERYTHING.
EXPECTATION THAT YOU'D GO TO
>> Reporter: WAS THERE THE
COLLEGE BEFORE THAT?
EXPECTATION THAT YOU'D GO TO
>> WELL, WE-- WE'RE NOT IN SUCH
COLLEGE BEFORE THAT?
A GOOD ECONOMIC STANDPOINT.
>> WELL, WE-- WE'RE NOT IN SUCH
I DIDN'T REALLY RECEIVE MUCH
A GOOD ECONOMIC STANDPOINT.
HOPE THAT I WAS ACTUALLY GOING
I DIDN'T REALLY RECEIVE MUCH
TO COLLEGE.
HOPE THAT I WAS ACTUALLY GOING
>> Reporter: 16-YEAR-OLD LILIA
TO COLLEGE.
ESCOBAR-WHOSE PARENTS ARE FROM
>> Reporter: 16-YEAR-OLD LILIA
MEXICO AND COLUMBIA-- SAYS SHE
ESCOBAR-WHOSE PARENTS ARE FROM
PLANS TO GO TO COLLEGE, EVEN
MEXICO AND COLUMBIA-- SAYS SHE
THOUGH ITS NOT SOMETHING HER
PLANS TO GO TO COLLEGE, EVEN
FAMILY ENCOURAGED.
THOUGH ITS NOT SOMETHING HER
>> NOW I FEEL LIKE I'M CAPABLE
FAMILY ENCOURAGED.
OF IT ALL.
>> NOW I FEEL LIKE I'M CAPABLE
I FEEL LIKE I DON'T EVER HAVE TO
OF IT ALL.
BE COMPARED TO MY FAMILY BECAUSE
I FEEL LIKE I DON'T EVER HAVE TO
I'M DOING MY OWN THING.
BE COMPARED TO MY FAMILY BECAUSE
THIS IS WHAT I WANT.
I'M DOING MY OWN THING.
THIS IS WHAT I'M GOING TO DO.
THIS IS WHAT I WANT.
AND THAT'S ONLY BECAUSE I CAME
THIS IS WHAT I'M GOING TO DO.
HERE AND I DON'T THINK I WOULD
AND THAT'S ONLY BECAUSE I CAME
HAVE FOUND THAT ANYWHERE ELSE.
HERE AND I DON'T THINK I WOULD
>> Reporter: RANDY DANG, WHOSE
HAVE FOUND THAT ANYWHERE ELSE.
PARENTS IMMIGRATED FROM VIETNAM,
>> Reporter: RANDY DANG, WHOSE
SAYS THE GROUP PROVIDES A BETTER
PARENTS IMMIGRATED FROM VIETNAM,
ALTERNATIVE TO THE GANGS AND
SAYS THE GROUP PROVIDES A BETTER
VIOLENCE IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
ALTERNATIVE TO THE GANGS AND
>> I LEARNED A LOT ABOUT MYSELF
VIOLENCE IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
AND WHAT I CAN DO, MY LIMITS.
>> I LEARNED A LOT ABOUT MYSELF
AND I LEARNED ABOUT THESE PEOPLE
AND WHAT I CAN DO, MY LIMITS.
I CAN RELATE TO, TALK TO, I CAN
AND I LEARNED ABOUT THESE PEOPLE
BE MYSELF AROUND.
I CAN RELATE TO, TALK TO, I CAN
7 7
BE MYSELF AROUND.
>> Reporter: "CHICAGO SUN-TIMES"
7 7
THEATER CRITIC HEDY WEISS,
>> Reporter: "CHICAGO SUN-TIMES"
CITING ITS UNUSUALLY HIGH
THEATER CRITIC HEDY WEISS,
STANDARDS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE'S
CITING ITS UNUSUALLY HIGH
THEATER, WROTE OF ITS LATEST
STANDARDS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE'S
OFFERING, THAT WHERE
THEATER, WROTE OF ITS LATEST
"POLITICIANS OF EVERY STRIPE"
OFFERING, THAT WHERE
HAVE FAILED, THIS "PRODIOUSIGLY
"POLITICIANS OF EVERY STRIPE"
GIFTED, EXQUISITELY DIRECTED
HAVE FAILED, THIS "PRODIOUSIGLY
YOUTH ENSEMBLE HAS TRIUMPHED."
GIFTED, EXQUISITELY DIRECTED
.(APPLAUSE)
YOUTH ENSEMBLE HAS TRIUMPHED."
>> Suarez: "HOMELAND" PLAYED TO
.(APPLAUSE)
A PACKED HOUSE IN A SMALL
>> Suarez: "HOMELAND" PLAYED TO
COMMUNITY THEATER LAST YEAR...
A PACKED HOUSE IN A SMALL
AND THIS SUMMER, THE COMPANY
COMMUNITY THEATER LAST YEAR...
MADE THE BIG TIME.  THE
AND THIS SUMMER, THE COMPANY
PRESTIGIOUS GOODMAN THEATRE IN
MADE THE BIG TIME.  THE
CHICAGO WAS SO IMPRESSED WITH
PRESTIGIOUS GOODMAN THEATRE IN
THE PERFORMANCE IT HOSTED THE
CHICAGO WAS SO IMPRESSED WITH
SHOW FOR TEN DAYS LAST MONTH.
THE PERFORMANCE IT HOSTED THE
AND THE STUDENTS PROFILED IN
SHOW FOR TEN DAYS LAST MONTH.
JEFF'S STORY HAVE ALSO BEEN
AND THE STUDENTS PROFILED IN
SUCCESSFUL.
JEFF'S STORY HAVE ALSO BEEN
BLADIMIR ORDUNO DID INDEED GO TO
SUCCESSFUL.
POMONA COLLEGE WHERE HE'LL BE A
BLADIMIR ORDUNO DID INDEED GO TO
SOPHOMORE THIS FALL.  LILIA
POMONA COLLEGE WHERE HE'LL BE A
ESCOBAR WILL ATTEND ST. OLAF
SOPHOMORE THIS FALL.  LILIA
COLLEGE AND
ESCOBAR WILL ATTEND ST. OLAF
RANDY DANG WILL ATTEND
COLLEGE AND
NORTHEASTERN ILLINOIS
RANDY DANG WILL ATTEND
UNIVERSITY.
>> Ifill: A WEEK FROM TODAY,
THREE U.S. PRESIDENTS AND
THOUSANDS MORE WILL GATHER IN
THE NATION'S CAPITAL TO MARK THE
50th ANNIVERSARY OF THE MARCH ON
WASHINGTON.
WE CONTINUE OUR LOOK BACK OVER
THE DECADES TONIGHT, WITH THE
WORDS OF ONE OF THE STUDENT
VOLUNTEERS FROM THAT DAY-- MIKI
CONN FROM UPSTATE NEW YORK--
WHO AT THE TIME WAS ATTENDING
HOWARD UNIVERSITY.
.->> THE MARCH ON WASHINGTON TOK
PLACE WHEN I WAS 18, MY FIRST
SUMMERT A HOWARD.
I FOUND OUT THROUGH THE
NONVIOLENT ACTION GROUP, NAG,
THAT A MARCH ON WASHINGTON WAS
BEING ORGANIZED AND THAT THERE
WAS AN OFFICE THERE THAT NEEDED
-IN ADDITION TO LEARNING HOW TO
DO A MAILING, I LEARNED THAT IT
WASN'T SOLELY ABOUT THAT DAY.
THAT IT WAS ABOUT WHAT COMES
AFTER.
WHAT THE MARCH ON WASHINGTON
SHOWED ME IS THAT THERE ARE
ALWAYS OTHERS WHO HAVE THE SAME
INTERESTS, THE SAME CONCERNS.
AND THAT IF YOU CAN GET THEM
TOGETH TOER THINK ABOUT IT AND
PLAN ABOUT IT YOU CAN MAKE
CHANGES.
>> Ifill: THAT WAS MIKI CONN
FROM UPSTATE NEW YORK.
SHE'S ONE OF MANY WHOSE
FIRSTHAND ACCOUNTS APPEAR
IN THE NEW WEB SERIES, "MEMORIES
OF THE MARCH," PRODUCED BY
PUBLIC TELEVISION STATIONS
AROUND THE COUNTRY FOR THE PBS
WEBSITE, "BLACK CULTURE
CONNECTION."
NOW WE TURN TO THE SECOND IN OUR
OWN SERIES OF CONVERSATIONS
ABOUT THE MARCH.
I SPOKE YESTERDAY WITH
DEMOCRATIC CONGRESSWOMAN
ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON OF
WASHINGTON, D.C., WHO IN 1963
WORKED AS ONE OF THE EVENT'S
ORIGINAL ORGANIZERS.
CONGRESSWOMAN NORTON, THANK YOU.
IN 1963, YOU WERE WHAT THEY
BEHIND THE SCENES ACTUALLY
HOW DID YOU GET INVOLVED?
>> WELL, I SPOE I WAS EVEN LOWER
THAN A WORKING BEE.
MISSISSIPPI FOR THE FIRST PART
OF THE SUMMER KNOWING THAT THERE
WAS LOTS OF TALK ABOUT THE MARCH
ON WASHINGTON, NOT KNOWING IF IT
WOULD EVER COME TO BE BUT
MISSISSIPPI WAS THE LAST OF THE
STATES WHERE THERE HAD BEEN NO
DEMONSTRATIONS.
BUT NOT MISSISSIPPI.
HALFWAY THROUGH THE SUMMER, I
GOT A CALL SAYING "IT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN, ELEANOR.
AND BUY YARD IS GOING TO DO IT."
HE SAID, "COME ON UP IF YOU WANT
TO WORK ON THE STAFF."
BYYARD US ARE ON THE.
STATES WHO COULD HAVE ORGANIZED
THAT MARCH.
>> Ifill: WHAT DO YOU MEAN?
>> THERE WERE A SET OF SKILLS
THAT WE HAD NO REASON TO HAVE SO
NURTURED.
THERE HAD NEVER BEEN A MASS
MARCH ON WASHINGTON THAT ANYONE.
THERE HAD BEEN ALL KIND OFMARCHS
MARCH.
WHAT WOULD IT TAKE TO ORGANIZE
SUCH A MARCH WITH NO EXPERIENCE,
NO PRECEDENT TO DRAW FROM.
>> Ifill: NO SOCIAL MEDIA, NO
FLASH MOBS.
WITH ONLY TELEPHONES AND THE
USUAL OLD-FASHIONED 20th
CENTURY MEANS OF COMMUNICATION.
ON.L, FIRST IT TOOK
IT TOOK SOMEONE -- AND I THINK
BUYARD PUT IT ALL IN ONE.
HE HAD BEEN A PASS F.I.S.EDWORLN
CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE IN
LEAVENWORTH WHEN BLACKS AND
WHITES WERE SEGREGATED.
HE HAD BEEN ON A FREEDOM RIDE IN
THE '40s.
HE HAD BEEN  TO THE LABOR
MOVEMENT AND KNEW HOW TO
Y A. PHILLIP RANDOLPH, HAD BEEN
THE ONLY MAN IN THE UNITED
STATES WHO HAD ORGANIZED
ANYTHING NATIONALLY AND THAT WAS
THE SLEEPING CAR OF PORTERS.
INTERESTING WHEN PEOPLE THINK
BACK ON THE MARCH THEY THINK IN
A MONOLITHIC ALMOST SEPIA-TONED
WAY BUT VERY KIND OF PEOPLE PUT
TOGETHER -- HERE YOU WERE MANY
THINGS: A BLACK WOMAN, A LAW
STUDENT WHICH MANY PEOPLE HADN'T
SEEN THAT COMBINATION.
BUYARD US ARE ON THE, AN OUT GAY
MAN WHO THE MOVEMENT WASN'T
HAPPY ABOUT, LET ALONE OTHER
PEOPLE.
HOW DID ALL OF THOSE THINGS COME
TOGETHER?
THERE MUST HAVE BEEN>> THERE WAM
THURMOND DECIDED TO TAKE TO THE
FLOOR OF THE SENATE TO TRY TO
OUT A MAN WHO HAD NEVER HIDDEN
HIS HOMOSEXUALITY.
TO THE CREDIT OF THE SO-CALLED
BIG SIX AND THE MAJOR CIVIL
RIGHTSES ORS THEY GATHERED
AROUND HIM AND THAT WAS IT.-THIF
TRYING TO SOMEHOW DERAIL IT.
PARTICULARLY BY THAT POINT IT
COULDN'T HAVE BEEN DONE.->> IfiE
STATURE OF WOMEN IN THE
MOVEMENT?
YOU WERE A WORKER BEE, YOU WERE
THE SCENES, WHO WAS ON THAT
FEW WOMEN THERE WERE.
>> Ifill: REALLY.
>> PREFEMINISM.TODAY, OF COURSEE
YOU WERE A WORKER BEE, YOU WERE
THE SCENES, WHO WAS ON THAT
PLATFORM?
>> Ifill: REALLY.
>> PREFEMINISM.TODAY, OF COURSEE
GONE UP IN SMOKE.
WHY WASN'T DOROTHY HEIGHTS A
SPEAKER AT THE MARCH?
BROADEST COALITION OF AFRICAN
AMERICAN WOMEN IN THE COUNTRY
WHO WAS TO SPEAK WE THE WIDOW OF
MEDGAR EVERS.
SHE DID NOT MAKE IT TO THE MARCH
SO THAT THERE WERE NO WOMEN
SPEAKING.
AND YET WOMEN HAD BEEN VERY
IMPORTANT IN THE MOVEMENT.
BUT INTERESTINGLY, YOU WILL NOT
BE ABLE TO THINK OF A WOMAN WHO
WAS -- EXCEPTOR F DOROTHY HIKE,
CONSIDERED A LEADER OF THE
MOVEMENT.
AND THAT, I THINK, EXPLAINS IT.
ALTHOUGH AFRICAN AMERICANS HAVE
BEEN MUCH MORE OPEN TO
LEADERSHIP OF WOMEN.
THEY WEREN'T FAR THAT FAR
ADVANCED THAN THE REST OFSOCIETW
IT DIDN'T BECOME REAL UNTIL THE
->> Ifill: YOU HAD A UNIQUE
OF YOUR LOWLY STATUS, YOU STAYED
BEHIND IN NEW YORK AND HAD TO
LOCK UP THE OFFICE.
SO YOU BAHT TO SEE THE MARCH A
DIFFERENT WAY.
>> I DID.
THE LAST STAFF MEETING BUYARD
SAID "SOMEBODY'S GOT TO STAY IN
THIS FOUR STORY BROWNSTONE AT
135th AND LENOX ALL NIGHT
BUT A YOU KNOW SOMEBODY'S GOING
TO CALL AND SAY HOW DO YOU GET?"
SO I RAYED MYWASHINGTONIAN ME KI
HAD TO GET ON A PLANE NOT ON A
BUS AND THAT VIEW IN THE
MORNING, I DON'T REMEMBER THE
EXACT TIME, BUT IT WAS MUCH TOO
EARLY FOR THE MARCH TO HAVE
STARTED.
GREAT GLOBS OF PEOPLE GATHERED
NOT ON THE MALL BUT IN AN AREA,
A STAGING AREA.
AND AS PEOPLE TIRED OF WAITING
BECAUSE THE CIVIL RIGHTS LEADERS
HAD GONE INTO THE WHITE HOUSE,
-IT WAS AS IF "WE CAME HERE TO
MARCH, I DON'T KNOW WHERE YOU
ALL ARE."
THE LEADERS HAD TO RUN TO CATCH
UP WITH THE CROWD.
THEY SAID "OH, BOY, ARE WE
SUPPOSED TO BE LEADERS OF THIS
MARCH OR NOT?"
>> Ifill: THE OTHER
INTERESTING THING ABOUT THIS
MARCH, PEOPLE THINK OF THE
'60s THINK THINK OF WOODSTOCK.
IT WASN'T A RALLY, IT WASN'T A
Y'ALL COME KIND OF MARCH.
WHAT WE DEMAND.
->> THIS IS SO IMPORTANT.
FIRST, THE MARGE WAS GOING TO B.
I BELIEVE IT WAS BUYARD WHO
INSISTED, WAIT A MINUTE, WHAT IS
THE CONTENT OF THAT?
IT BECAME A MARCH FOR JOBS AND
WAY WE DO TODAY.
IN FACT, THE ECONOMY WE PRETTY
GOOD.
INTEGRATION, IT WAS ABOUT
ECONOMIC EQUALITY?>> YEAH!
AND I WENT TO GET A JOB OF ANY
KIND BUT PARTICULARLY A JOB OFTE
COMINGING TO STRAIGHT OUT THEY
WOULD SAY "I'M SORRY, WE DON'T
HIRE BLACKS HERE."
THAT WAS NORTH, SOUTH, EAST, AND
WEST.
SO IT WAS ABOUT EVEN THE MOST
MENIAL JOBS IN THE FIRST -- ONCE
THE E.E.O.C. AND THIS WAS THE
AGENCY I MYSELF WE TO LEAD 15
YEARS LATER, SOMETHING I COULD
NEVER HAVE IMAGINED.
THE FIRST CASES WERE BROUGHT FOR
THE LOWEST KIND OF JOBS IN
FACTORIES IN THE SOUTH WHERE YOU
HAD TO HAVE NO SKILLS BUT YOU
HAD TO TAKEN A INCOMPETENT -- AN
I.Q. TEST TO GET THE JOB.
SO IT WAS NAKED, IT WAS BALD AND
ALL ABOUT RACE.
>> Ifill: 50 YEAR LATER THE,
MARCH IS NOW THIS ICONIC MEMORY.
HAVE WE COME AS FAR AS WE COULD
HAVE COME FROM THAT TIME?
BUT SO MUCH FURTHER THAN WE
WERE.
RACE -- THE SOUTH HAS CHANGED IN
PART BUT A SOME OF THOSE PEOPLE
AREN'T WITH US ANYMORE AND NEW
GENERATIONS HAVE COME FORWARD.
PARTLY BUT A MANY PEOPLE CHANGED
THEIR VIEWS.
IT IS NOT RESPECTABLE TODAY TO
-ITAS PERFECTLY ALL RIGHT IN
1963.
NO PRESIDENT TODAY-- LIKE
KENNEDY, WHO WE A FRIEND OF-AFRR
THE MARCH THE WAY THE
ADMINISTRATION FEARED THE MARCH.
NOW, REMEMBER, WE HAVE BEEN
ENGAGED IN A NONVIOLENT MOVEMENT
TAKING ALL KIND OF BLOWS.
SO THE VIOLENCE WASN'T GOING TO
COME TO US.IN FACT, THERE WERE .
THERE WERE POLICE WHO COULD ONL.
IF THERE WAS GOING TO BE
VIOLENCE, IT WAS GOING TO BE
PEOPLE COMING IN FROM SOME PLACE
ELSE.
THEE PEOPLE COMING FROM ALL OVER
THE COUNTRY THEY WOULD BE
COMING.
THE COUNTRY, WERE THEY REALLY
GOING TO COME FROM ALL OVER THE
COUNTRY?
LOOK, I'VE BEEN ON THE PHONE A
LOT WITH BUSES AND TRAINS, I
THINK THEY'RE COMING.>> Ifill: T
POSSIBLE TO REPLICATE THAT TODAY
GIVEN ALL WE HAVE ACCOMPLISHED?
A LOT OF PEOPLE THINK WITH WE'RE
FINE NOW.
STARTLING NUMBERS.
AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT MAKES
A STRAIGHT LINE BETWEEN THE
MARCH AND THE '64 CIVIL RIGHTS
ACT, THE FIRST ENFORCEABLE CIVIL
RIGHTS LEGISLATION SINCE THE
CIVIL WAR IS THAT IT WAS
STARTLING TO SEE SO MANY PEOPLE
COME.
AND I REMEMBER STANDING AT THE
LINCOLN MEMORIAL LOOKING OUT.
MANY PEOPLE RECALL AND, OF
COURSE, I WENT DOWN TO SEE WHAT
LOOKING UP WOULD MEAN.
BUT LOOKING OUT WHAT WAS THE
SIGHT FOR ME BUT A I COULD NOT
SEE THE LAST PERSON ON THE MALL.
NOW THAT MOLD HAS SET THE
PATTERN FOR MARCHS THAT ARE HELD
ON EVERY CONCEIVABLE SUBJECT
TODAY.IT BROKE OPEN THE NOTION T
MASS MOVEMENTS COULDN'T HAPPEN.
AND, REMEMBER, WE'RE TALKING'63E
'50s WHICH WERE THE MOST
COMPLACENT OF DECADE AND WHEN
YOU HAD McCARTHYISM.
SO YOU REALLY HAD THE DAWNING OF
A NEW ERA WITH THE MARCH ON
->> Ifill: HERE YOU ARE TODAY,
A SITTING MEMBER OF CONGRESS,
FORMER HEAD OF THE EQUAL
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
COMMISSION, A YOU MENTIONED.
IS THIS ANYTHING YOU COULD HAVE
ENVISIONED STANDING THERE THAT
DAY?
OF A CONGRESS BECAUSE THE
DISTRICT HAD NO MEMBER OF
CONGRESS, IT DIDN'T EVEN HAVE
HOME RULE.
ISN'T IT INTERESTING AT THIS
TIME THE DISTRICT WILL TRY TO
DRAW THE ATTENTION TO THE FACT
THAT THE MARCH IS BEING HELD
UNTIL THE CITY THAT IS LEAST
EMPOWERED.
AND THE NOTION OF BEING A
FEDERAL OFFICIAL SEEMED
FARFETCHED.
THE MOVEMENT.
SO THE WHOLE NOTION OF BEING A
MEMBER OF CONGRESS WHEN THERE
WERE A HANDFUL, MAYBE A HALF
DOZEN IF THAT WAS NOT ON OUR
LIST.
OUR LIST WAS ARE BLACK PEOPLE
GOING TO BE ABLE TO GO IN,WHETHO
SAY "I'VE BEEN TO HIGH SCHOOL,
I'VE BEEN TO COLLEGE, I WANT A
JOB."
OCCURRED.
WHOLE NEW SET OF ISSUES CROP UP.
AND MOVEMENTS ARE ABOUT ADAPTING
TO THE NEW SET OF ISSUES.
ADAPTING TO THE FACT THAT THEVOE
REVISED OR IT WILL BE USELESS.
ADAPTING TO THE FACT THATTRAYVOS
MURDERED AND THAT THERE ARE
STILL STAND YOUR GROUND LAWS ON
THE BOOKS WHICH ARE A CLEAR AND
PRESENT DANGER TO EVERY BLACK
MAN IN THE UNITED STATES.
DO WE HAVE A MOVEMENT THAT IS
CAPABLE OF GROWING TO EMBRACE
THESE NEW ISSUES?
THAT, I THINK, WILL BE THE
QUESTION ON AUGUST 28, 2013.
NORTON, CONGRESSWOMAN, THANK SO
MUCH.
>> Ifill: WE'LL SHARE MORE OF
OUR 50th ANNIVERSARY
CONVERSATIONS NEXT WEEK.
ON MONDAY, I TALK WITH AN
ACTIVIST WHO MARCHED AND WITH HI
SON, NOW AN ELECTED STATE
LAWMAKER ABOUT HOW THE MARCH HAS
REVERBERATED ACROSS GENERATIONS.
>> Suarez: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
SYRIAN ACTIVISTS AND REBELS
ACCUSED THE GOVERNMENT OF
CARRYING OUT A TOXIC CHEMICAL
ATTACK NEAR DAMASCUS THAT KILLED
HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE.
THE U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL HELD
EMERGENCY CONSULTATIONS THIS
AFTERNOON TO DISCUSS WHAT TO DO
NEXT.
AND ARMY PRIVATE BRADLEY MANNING
RECEIVED A PRISON SENTENCE OF 35
YEARS FOR PASSING MORE THAN
700,000 CLASSIFIED FILES TO
WIKILEAKS.
>> Ifill: MIRROR, MIRROR ON THE
WALL, WHO'S THE RICHEST OF THEM
ALL?
KWAME HOLMAN TELLS US.
>> Holman: DOES WEALTH BREED
NARCISSISM?
RESEARCHERS HAVE FOUND A
CONNECTION BETWEEN HOW WEALTHY
YOU ARE AND HOW MUCH YOU STARE
READ MORE ON MAKING SENSE.
AS STUDENTS START BACK TO
COLLEGE, HARI SREENIVASAN TALKS
TO ANYA KAMEN-ETZ, AUTHOR OF
ENER"GATION DEBT" ABOUT THE
STUDENT LOAN DEBT CRISIS IN
AMERICA.
AND WITH OPEN ENROLLMENT IN
HEALTH INSURANCE EXCHANGES
BEGINNING OCTOBER FIRST, WE WANT
TO HEAR FROM YOU.
WE'RE HOSTING A TWITTER CHAT
TOMORROW--  BE SURE TO JOIN US
ONLINE THURSDAY AT 1:00 P.M.
EST.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
RAY?
>> Suarez: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT THE
CHALLENGE OF GOVERNING IN
WASHINGTON, D.C. AT A TIME OF
GRIDLOCK.
I'M RAY SUAREZ
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.